JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of
the United States: I will get
rid of and totally destroy the
Johnson amendment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President
Trump vows to drastically
change the way church
and state are separated
during political campaigns.
Then: what we know
about a deadly raid by
Navy SEALs in Yemen.
Details emerge from the
dangerous counterterrorism
operation against al-Qaida.
And we travel to a
corner of Kentucky where
many people depend on
Obamacare to hear their
thoughts on the possibility
of repeal and replace.
KATHY OLLER, Obamacare
Enrollment Official:
Some people feel that
because Trump's in office,
why do we have to have
it, because they're hoping
they don't get fined.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and
more on tonight's "PBS NewsHour"
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: From prayer
breakfast to biker heaven, the
president spent this day talking
about religion,
politics, trade and more.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: Today, President
Trump revved up his new
administration with a
visit from Harley-Davidson
executives and workers.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: Boy, would you
like to see me fall off these
things?
Would that be a story?
JOHN YANG: And used the annual
National Prayer Breakfast to
reignite a campaign promise,
vowing to change the tax
code to allow churches
and other tax-exempt
groups to openly campaign
for political candidates.
DONALD TRUMP: I will get rid
of and totally destroy the
Johnson amendment and allow our
representatives of faith
to speak freely and without
fear of retribution.
I will do that.
Remember.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: The provision wasn't
controversial when then-senator
Lyndon Johnson introduced
it and President Dwight
Eisenhower signed
it into law in 1954.
Now some religious leaders,
especially conservative
Christians, say it
violates their freedom
of speech.
Speaking at the
breakfast, Mr. Trump also
defended his immigration
order against critics
who say it's a ban on Muslims.
DONALD TRUMP: In the coming
days, we will develop a system
to help ensure that those
admitted into our country
fully embrace our values of
religious and personal liberty,
and that they reject any form of
oppression and discrimination.
We want people to come into
our nation, but we want people
to love us and to love our
values, not to hate us
and to hate our values.
JOHN YANG: There were also
lighter moments, as when
the president suggested
divine intervention
for the current incarnation of
his TV show, "The Apprentice."
DONALD TRUMP: They hired
a big, big movie star,
Arnold Schwarzenegger,
to take my place.
And we know how that turned out.
The ratings went
right down the tubes.
It's been a total disaster.
I want to just pray
for Arnold, if we can,
for those ratings, OK?
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN YANG: Schwarzenegger
responded on the president's
favorite forum with a Twitter
video.
ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER, Former
California Governor: Hey,
Donald, I have a great idea.
Why don't we switch jobs?
You take over TV, because you're
such an expert in ratings,
and I take over your job.
And then people can finally
sleep comfortably again.
JOHN YANG: Later, Mr. Trump
met at the White House with the
leaders of the Senate Finance
and House Ways and
Means Committees.
The topic?
Trade.
DONALD TRUMP: NAFTA has been
a catastrophe for our country.
It's been a catastrophe
for our workers and our
jobs and our companies.
They're leaving our country.
I want to change it.
And maybe we do it.
Maybe we do a new NAFTA,
and we put an extra
F in the term NAFTA.
You know what the
F is for, right?
Free and fair trade.
Not just free trade.
JOHN YANG: The president also
responded to violent protests
last night at the University
of California, Berkeley, that
led the cancellation of an
appearance by Milo Yiannopoulos.
He is the highly contentious
senior editor for Breitbart
News, formerly run by top Trump
adviser Stephen Bannon.
Mr. Trump tweeted: "If U.C.
Berkeley doesn't allow free
speech and practices violence on
innocent people with a different
point of view, no
federal funds?"
The president may face protests
in person at his Mar-a-Lago
resort in Florida, where
he plans to spend the weekend.
Tonight, there are growing
indications that the White House
intends to put new sanctions
on Iran perhaps as
soon as tomorrow.
Just yesterday, Lieutenant
General Michael Flynn, the
national security adviser, put
Iran on notice over a nuclear
-- over a missile test that he
said violated a United Nations
Security Council resolution.
Now, that violation has nothing
to do with the Iran nuclear
agreement, and administration
officials say that
whatever sanctions there
may be will conform with
that agreement -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John, back
to something else you were
just talking about, and that's
the president's tweet where
he essentially sounded like he
was threatening the University
of California at Berkeley
over a loss of federal funds
because of those protests.
What are you hearing about
that at the White House?
JOHN YANG: Well, Berkeley
tells us they get about $600
million in federal funds, $200
million for financial aid for
students, another $400 million
for research, research grants.
The people who know about
federal funding for schools tell
us it's virtually impossible
for a president or even a
Congress by themselves to
single out a university
or even a university
system to cut off their funds
unless they violate the law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, separately,
John, there had been some
reporting that the president
might sign an executive order
that would allow businesses,
in effect, to not do business
with, not serve gays and
lesbians on religious grounds.
Where does that stand?
JOHN YANG: Today, Sean Spicer
says that's not something
that they're ready to roll out
or to say that the
president is going to sign.
There are indications
-- no indications
that it's coming soon.
To put this into a little
perspective, I talked
to people who worked
in the transition, and
they said that they have been
encouraged to volunteer, to
write proposed executive orders,
that there was actually
a book of executive - -
proposed executive orders.
So there are a lot of draft
executive orders on a lot of
topics, but, as Sean Spicer said
today, the key is whether
or not President Trump says
that's the one I want to sign.
And so far, on this
topic, Spicer said,
he hasn't said that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John,
a lot for our White House
reporters to keep track of.
Thank you, John.
And the day's other news:
Two more Cabinet nominees
advanced to the full
Senate for confirmation
votes.
Two Senate committees endorsed
South Carolina Congressman
Mick Mulvaney to run the White
House Office of
Management and Budget.
And the nomination of Scott
Pruitt to head the Environmental
Protection Agency got through
the Senate
Environment Committee.
Democrats boycotted that
meeting, so Republicans
suspended the rules, and
took the vote without
them.
The newly sworn-in secretary
of state, Rex Tillerson, urged
his employees today to put
aside any political differences
with President Trump.
Hundreds in the State Department
have signed what is called a
note of dissent against the
executive order on
immigration and refugees.
Tillerson addressed his work
force for the first time.
He praised them, and said he
understands their frustrations.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary
of State: I know this was a
hotly contested election and
we do not all feel the
same way about the outcome.
Each of us is entitled
to the expression of
our political beliefs.
But we cannot let our personal
convictions overwhelm our
ability to work as one team.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The White House
has warned the dissenting
State Department diplomats
to -- quote -- "get with
the program or get out."
The secretary of homeland
security says he hopes to
complete a wall along the Mexico
border within two years.
John Kelly told FOX News today
that he expects that Congress
will find the funding relatively
quickly, in his words.
President Trump has
insisted that Mexico will
ultimately cover the cost.
Meanwhile, the department's
inspector general says that he
will review how the president's
immigration order
was implemented.
A snowpack survey in California
has found the most snow since
1995, enough that it could
put an end to a
five-year drought.
Today's check in the Sierra
Nevada follows major January
storms that brought more than
a year's worth of rain and snow.
The surge in precipitation
already lifted the northern half
of the state out of drought.
The storms also caused
heavy flooding and
damage in some places.
Republicans in Congress today
ramped up their efforts to roll
back Obama-era regulations.
The Senate gave final approval
to rescinding a regulation
against dumping coal mine waste
into streams.
And the House voted to
kill background checks
for mentally disabled
people on Social Security
who try to buy guns.
That measure now
goes to the Senate.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost
six points to close below 19885.
The Nasdaq fell six, but
the S&P 500 added a point.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
unraveling what went wrong
in a deadly military raid
in Yemen; is President Trump's
aggressive approach putting
world leaders on edge?; the
economic hurdles to replacing
Obamacare; and much more.
President Trump has made clear
that he will aggressively
target terror groups like ISIS
and al-Qaida.
On Sunday in Yemen, U.S.
special forces assaulted
an al-Qaida compound.
It was the first such raid
authorized by the new president.
But details of the planning
and the execution of the raid
have come under scrutiny this
week.
Hari Sreenivasan has that story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the
early morning hours on Sunday,
members of the elite SEAL Team
Six approached a village in the
Yakla region of Yemen's Bayda
province, their target, an
al-Qaida stronghold known
to U.S. intelligence since
the Obama administration.
A firefight ensued, and the
commandos had to call in air
support from fighter aircraft
and helicopter gunships.
A Navy SEAL, Chief Petty Officer
Ryan Owens, was killed in the
battle and a transport aircraft
suffered a hard landing
and had to be destroyed.
The U.S. military
acknowledged last night that
it had also likely killed
civilian noncombatants
during the fight.
White House spokesman
Sean Spicer spoke of
the mission today:
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary: It's hard to ever
call something a complete
success when you have a loss
of life or people injured.
But I think when you look at
the totality of what was gained
to prevent the future loss
of life here in America
and against our people
and our institutions
and probably throughout
the world in terms of what some
of these individuals could have
done, I think it is a successful
operation by all standards.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For more
on the raid and the strength
of the al-Qaida branch there,
I'm joined by David Sanger of
The New York Times and Richard
Atwood of the International
Crisis Group, which released
a report today on the strength
and capabilities of al-Qaida
in Yemen.
David, I want to ask you first,
most presidents say this is
the toughest decision that they
have, to send a member of the
armed forces into harm's way.
What was that decision-making
process like this time?
DAVID SANGER, The New York
Times: Well, the process
was somewhat unusual, Hari.
Usually, a president goes
down in the Situation
Room, is presented with
what they call a full
package for the attack.
There's a legal assessment of
the legal authorities under
which they're doing these.
There's a risk assessment to the
commandos who would be doing it.
There is a risk assessment
of what could happen to
civilians who are in the area.
This particular attack
had been set up by the
Obama administration.
They had debated it, and
President Obama decided
about 10 days before
the end of his term that
he couldn't approve it because
the Pentagon really wanted
to go in under the complete
cover of darkness,
a moonless night.
And the next moonless night
wasn't going to be until after
he was no longer in office.
So, they kicked this one over
to the new administration.
And it looks like President
Trump got briefed on it, by and
large, at a dinner, not in the
Situation Room, not with
legal advisers around.
His secretary of defense,
Jim Mattis, was there.
Vice President Pence was there.
Stephen Bannon, who has emerged
as the newest member of the
National Security Council, known
really more for his political
advice than military, was there.
So was his new national
security adviser, Michael Flynn,
who is a veteran of many of
these.
But the discussion took
place in a dinner situation.
And he approved the
raid at that dinner.
And I think one of the
questions, given how
many things have gone
wrong, is, would it
have been different if he had
been in the Situation Room
and perhaps had a different
set of briefings?
The White House insists not.
It's hard to call this much
of a success yet, because we
don't know what the value was of
the information they were
trying to exploit, which came
mostly from computers and cell
phones.
And from everything we have
heard, they haven't had a
chance to assess that yet.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Richard
Atwood, put this in
perspective for us.
How strong is al-Qaida in Yemen?
RICHARD ATWOOD, International
Crisis Group: We -- as you said,
we published a report today
that looks at the evolution
of al-Qaida in Yemen.
And, obviously, there's a lot
of talk about the Islamic State,
but, in Yemen, it's really
al-Qaida that's done well
over the last few years.
Really, the civil war
-- it's been the main
beneficiary of the civil war.
And as fighting has escalated
between the two sides, between
President Hadi's government
and its Saudi-backed
international coalition
on the one hand against
the Houthis and former
President Saleh, as fighting
has escalated, al-Qaida has
really been able to exploit the
chaos.
It's been able to control
territory and control
the town of Mukalla on
the Gulf of Aden for
some time.
It's strengthened its
ties to some communities.
It has very ties, close ties
with some of the other armed
groups that are fighting in
the anti-Houthi Saleh alliance.
It's undoubtedly
got much richer.
It's been able to
raid banks in Mukalla.
It was embedded in the economy
in Mukalla for a long time.
And it's much better armed.
It's been able to gain guns and
weapons that have been passed
into other armed groups in
which it's in an alliance.
So I think it's
stronger than ever.
And, frankly, the longer the
war continues in Yemen, the
stronger al-Qaida is likely
to get.
I would just -- on the operation
yesterday, you know, I think
I agree with David that
it's very difficult to know
whether it's a success until
we know what information was
retrieved.
On the other hand, I think
there's aspects of it that
are clearly not a success.
There's a lot of tribesmen
at the moment in Yemen.
And an operation like this
is more likely to radicalize
them, more likely to push them
into the arms of al-Qaida,
particularly then if it has a
high civilian cost, if it kills
women, if it kills
children, particularly if
U.S. forces are involved.
It tends to feed
anti-Americanism and strengthen
those alliances between
the tribes in al-Qaida,
which is what
al-Qaida profits from.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David, did
any of thing from officials
or anybody else that you spoke
to say that that factored
into the Trump administration
or President Trump's
decision to do this?
DAVID SANGER: We don't have a
lot of view into the decision
-- discussion that they
had at the dinner table.
But I think Richard raises one
of the most important points.
Over time, presidents learn
that the biggest risk out here
is not only the civilian risk
and the risk to American forces,
but whether - - as Donald
Rumsfeld used to say, whether
you're creating terrorists
faster than you're killing them.
And certainly, if you have
a case like this where there
appear to have been considerable
civilian casualties, that may
well be the case, especially
because, even if some of
those civilians may have taken
up arms and fired against
the SEALs, in the mythology
of what went on, you're
going to hear a story
of SEALs who dropped out
of the sky and suddenly
attacked a remote
village in Yemen.
And you can imagine the
recruiting capability of that.
So, you know, part of what's
going on here, Hari, is that you
have in the Trump administration
a group that believes that the
decision-making in these kind
of cases has to be shortened,
that more of the power has
to be devolved down to the
Pentagon, the commanders.
And yet, in the first case
that the president approved,
things went very badly wrong.
And you have to wonder whether
or not that is going to have
the effect of making them
think that they need to slow
down and think more about the
effects of these and get fuller
briefings, or whether they're
simply going to say, look,
this happens sometimes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All
right, David Sanger, Richard
Atwood, thank you both.
RICHARD ATWOOD: Thank you.
DAVID SANGER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, barely two
weeks into his term, President
Trump has shaken up global
affairs through a series of
unilateral legal and diplomatic
moves and some blunt talk and
tweets.
Longstanding American allies
and adversaries are asking
what the new administration has
in mind for its
relations abroad.
One of several clues,
Iran's test-launch of a
medium-range ballistic
missile, which triggered
a direct White House response
from Mr. Trump's national
security team yesterday.
And in a tweet this morning,
the president wrote: "Iran has
been formally put on notice
for firing a ballistic missile."
It's not clear just what "on
notice" means, but Mr. Trump
was asked today whether military
action is off the table.
DONALD TRUMP, President
of the United States:
Nothing is off the table.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A top adviser to
Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah
Khamenei, dismissed it all
today, saying: "The American
government will understand that
threatening Iran is useless."
By contrast, the administration
has been relatively quiet about
new fighting in Eastern Ukraine
between government forces and
Russian-backed rebels, though,
late today, the U.S. ambassador
to the U.N., Nikki Haley, said
the situation requires clear
and wrong strong condemnation
of Russian actions.
Mr. Trump's conciliatory talk
about Russia and his critiques
of the European Union have
leaders on the
continent concerned.
Donald Tusk is president
of the European Council.
DONALD TUSK, European Council
President: We should today
remind our American friends of
their own motto:
United we stand.
Divided, we fall.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile,
a phone call Saturday
with Australia's Prime
Minister Malcolm Turnbull
is raising eyebrows.
The Washington Post reports
the president told Turnbull,
"This was the worst call by
far" that he's had
with a foreign leader.
At issue, the Obama
administration's agreement
to resettle refugees not
allowed into Australia.
DONALD TRUMP: I love
Australia as a country.
But we had a problem where,
for whatever reason, President
Obama said that they were going
to take probably well over
1,000 illegal immigrants
who were in prisons.
And I said, why?
Why are we doing this?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Prime
Minister Turnbull played
down the incident.
MALCOLM TURNBULL, Australian
Prime Minister: The fact that
we received the assurance that
we did, the fact that it was
confirmed, the very extensive
engagement we have with the
new administration underlines
the closeness of the alliance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Separately, the
Associated Press reports Mr.
Trump told Mexico's president
he might send U.S. troops
to deal with -- quote - -
"bad hombres down there."
The White House says the
remark was lighthearted.
Mexico denies it happened.
The president's take?
DONALD TRUMP: I fix things.
We're going to
straighten it out.
Believe me, when you hear
about tough phone calls I'm
having, don't worry about it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All this as the
newly minted secretary of state
tried to rally a work force,
many of whom are already
unhappy, following last
weekend's unveiling of
extensive restrictions
for travelers from seven
majority-Muslim nations.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: We're on the same team.
We share the same mission.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary
Rex Tillerson began
today by discussing that
policy with Germany's
foreign minister.
We take a deeper look now at
the president's actions on the
world stage with James Jeffrey.
He served in several senior
positions during his 35-year
career as a diplomat, including
U.S. ambassador to Turkey
and to Iraq, and as President
George W. Bush's deputy national
security adviser.
He's now at the Washington
Institute for Near East Policy.
And Wendy Sherman, she was
undersecretary of state for
political affairs during the
Obama administration.
She also held senior State
Department jobs during the
Clinton administration.
And we welcome both of
you back to the program.
JAMES JEFFREY, Former U.S.
Ambassador to Iraq: Thank you.
WENDY SHERMAN, Former U.S.
Undersecretary of State for
Political Affairs: Great to be
here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me just ask
you first, Ambassador Jeffrey,
what do you make overall
of the approach we're
seeing from this president
to foreign policy?
JAMES JEFFREY: Well, you
have to separate the drama
from some of the decisions.
As a longtime career guy,
I like quiet diplomacy
behind closed doors.
This is not what we're getting.
At the end of the day,
it's what America does,
how people perceive us,
in the long run, our
reliability and such,
and, thirdly, the personal
relationships presidents
have with their counterparts.
The tweeting and some of the
explosive conversations can hurt
the third and can have an impact
on the second, but, in the
end, what we really should
focus on is the policies.
Some of them have been bad, the
rollout of the immigration ban.
Others, we have to wait and see.
The reaction to the
Iranians, that was basically
within normal boundaries.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes, and
I want to ask you both
about the specifics.
But, overall, Wendy Sherman, how
do you read what's happening?
WENDY SHERMAN: You know, I think
that Republican analyst Steve
Schmidt had a great line, which
is, Americans clearly
voted for change, but they
didn't vote for chaos.
And I think people are feeling
unnerved all around the world,
because they see a chaotic
set of directions coming out
of the White House, and they're
not sure what it all means.
Although I understand
what Ambassador Jeffrey
is saying about Michael
Flynn saying, Iran,
you are on notice, might have
been a response to the missile
launch, indeed, nobody knew
what that meant.
And it really roiled
people to try to figure
out what was happening.
When the president has leaked
out what happens in his phone
calls, and he's really taking
on some of our dearest allies
and partners around the world,
people don't know what to
expect and whether they can rely
on the United States anymore.
And they need to be able to
rely on us, just as we need
to be able to rely on them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Jim
Jeffrey, what about this
comment the president
made, reportedly,
in the phone conversation with
the prime minister of Australia,
when he said, "This is the worst
phone call I have had
with any world leader"?
Is this the kind of
back-and-forth that lends
itself, I guess, to, you
know, good work happening
between these two countries?
JAMES JEFFREY: Secretary Sherman
and I know that presidents
often have really bad phone
conversations.
What they usually don't do
is go out and talk about it.
That gets to my point about
doing some damage on the
periphery of our core policies.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're
saying what he said is
really no different from
what other presidents
- - the kind of thing other
presidents would have said?
JAMES JEFFREY: No, presidents
always -- not always, but often
have bad conversations with
counterparts.
They just don't go out and
embarrass their counterpart
by talking about it.
They find other ways to work
it out, which is what we're
trying to do right now.
It's this public airing of the
dirty laundry that is a problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's not
only that, Wendy Sherman.
It's the phone conversation,
the hour-long phone conversation
with the president of Mexico.
We later learned the president
said something to the effect
of sending U.S. troops down
there if you don't take care of
-- quote -- "the bad hombres."
WENDY SHERMAN: If you read
Donald Trump's book "The Art
of the Deal," you know that
he likes to create leverage,
he likes to have psychological
advantage, he likes to be on
the offense.
He believes in what he
calls truthful hyperbole.
He thinks all press
is good press.
And I think he believes that
he's putting everybody on a
psychological disadvantage,
so that he can have some
advantage in negotiations.
NAFTA is high on his agenda.
But if he goes too far, I think
the president of Mexico and
the Mexicans will decide they
would just as soon get
out of NAFTA, and we
don't want that either.
There may need to be some
changes, but to re-imagine the
entire world, as Ambassador
Jeffrey said, we have had
an international order.
It's not perfect, but for
70 years, it has kept Europe
whole and free and safe, and we
need to keep it in place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Ambassador
Jeffrey, what's the
difference between having
a vigorous conversation
and doing real damage?
I'm just looking again at
what the president said this
morning at the Prayer Breakfast.
He said, don't worry
about the reports of
the tough phone calls.
He said, we have to be tough.
It's time that we're going
to be a little tough.
JAMES JEFFREY: Well,
again, it does some damage.
But, as Wendy Sherman
said, behind the fireworks,
there are real issues
that the president and
particularly Steve Bannon, his
political adviser, are pushing.
It's a vision, a rather
dark vision, of a 19th
century world where great
powers do transactional
issues.
And it's very different
than what we have been
doing for the last 75 years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what are
you referring to specifically?
What concerns you?
JAMES JEFFREY: I'm concerned
about a relationship
with Russia that ignores
Russia's aggressiveness
in its near abroad.
I'm concerned about the
willingness to question
alliances and the value
of allies, or require
them to pay more, or
they don't get to play.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Reference to NATO?
JAMES JEFFREY: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we just
-- we were just looking at a
newswire report a moment ago,
Wendy Sherman, where we are
told that the vice president,
Mike Pence, had a meeting
with the German foreign
minister today in which
he -- they discussed NATO.
This just happened
within the hour.
And among other things, they
talked about the importance
of NATO members paying up.
This is something Donald
Trump talked about
during the campaign.
WENDY SHERMAN: Absolutely.
And so did President Obama talk
about it and push countries
to pay what they should as
their fair share in NATO.
And we should all push
every member to do that.
But the NATO alliance is
not just a transactional
relationship, once again.
That alliance serves
our interests.
That alliance has been critical
to keeping security in Europe,
so that we do not face
another world war.
So, it is in our national
security interests.
And, yes, we pay a lot for it,
but, when we had Afghanistan,
NATO troops were by our side
from almost all of
the NATO members.
And they put their life and
treasure on the line for us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, I come
back to the question,
Ambassador Jeffrey, at
what point -- how far
can a president go with tough
talk that's helpful for the
United States, that builds
the reputation and stands the
United States in good stead,
and when does it go too far?
Where to draw the line?
JAMES JEFFREY: Again, it's
a judgmental question.
Each of us have a different
reaction to tough talk, and our
friends abroad have a different
reaction, too.
At the end of the day, it is
what he does or doesn't do
as crises come up and as he
tries to advance his agenda.
He can hurt it on the
margins by this kind of talk.
That's my view.
He could help it with a
different approach to our allies
and friends and our foes.
But, at the end of the day,
it's going to be, what sort
of decisions does he take in
response to the really
great threats we have
in the world today?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is there a
risk -- or how much of a risk,
I should say, Wendy Sherman,
is there to damaging
personal relationships?
Or is that not
really an issue here?
WENDY SHERMAN: No, I
think that is an issue.
I think that's already happened.
One should talk tough to friends
in private, but, as the first
phone call with the president
of the United States,
you're trying to build
your personal relationship.
You're trying to build
on the alliance and the
partnerships that we have.
Usually, that tough talk
doesn't happen with your
friends and partners.
And people wonder why the tough
talk is happening with Mexico
and happening with Germany and
happening with our pals, but
it's not happening with Russia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is that
a concern for you?
JAMES JEFFREY: Absolutely.
Russia is the biggest threat
right now to the international
order, not the Islamic State,
not Iran, although
I have problems with
Iran, and not China.
It's Russia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we're hearing
a lot more about the Islamic
State and al-Qaida, in fact,
this week.
All right, well, a subject
very much to be continued.
Ambassador Jim Jeffrey,
Wendy Sherman, we thank you.
WENDY SHERMAN: Thank you.
JAMES JEFFREY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
woman's mission to help girls
in Liberia; and a letter to
five presidents
who owned slaves.
But first: Can Obamacare
be repealed and replaced
with a law without a
mandate requiring health
insurance coverage?
That's something the
president and congressional
Republicans seem to be
trying to do, although
just how is not
at all clear yet.
As the annual enrollment season
for buying insurance has come
to a close, there are very
real questions about how
this all would play out
once the law is changed.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman, went to Kentucky
to explore that further.
It's part of his weekly
series, Making Sense.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: Folks, folks,
we want to end Obamacare.
We want to go to a plan that
is so much better and so
much less expensive, right?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: Throughout
the campaign, Donald Trump
promised to repeal and
replace the Affordable
Care Act.
DONALD TRUMP: So help me God.
PAUL SOLMAN: And, sure enough,
on Inauguration Day, he signed
his first executive order,
directing government agencies
to begin scaling back the law.
That was good news for Trump
voter Perry Partin, a security
guard from Corbin, Kentucky.
PERRY PARTIN, Kentucky: It was
forced on me, shoved down your
throat, whether you wanted
it or not.
BOBBI SMITH, Kentucky:
I'm with Perry.
PAUL SOLMAN: Bobbi (ph) Smith,
who owns an antiques store,
was diagnosed with breast
cancer in the fall of 2015, a
year in which, having missed
the open enrollment deadline,
she'd accidentally gone
without health insurance.
She waited until January
to buy coverage on
healthcare.gov and get treated.
But, says this Trump voter:
BOBBI SMITH: I think if I were
to walk around here with no
health insurance, and that's
what I choose to do,
then that's my right.
PAUL SOLMAN: But you're thankful
you have that insurance?
BOBBI SMITH: Oh, yes, I am, yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, you're
kind of torn here?
BOBBI SMITH: That's right.
PAUL SOLMAN: Elizabeth
Easton has no such conflicts.
ELIZABETH EASTON,
Kentucky: I love it.
The only thing that Trump
would be able to do for me
would be universal health care.
PAUL SOLMAN: Easton
didn't vote for Trump.
She didn't vote at all, she
says, because she was high
and suicidal, having relapsed
into drug abuse following
a painful spinal infection.
She's now in recovery,
her addiction treatment
covered by Medicaid,
which was expanded under
Obamacare.
ELIZABETH EASTON: I have been a
user since I was in high school.
And I was able to check into
treatment because of it.
PAUL SOLMAN: And you
wouldn't have been without
the Affordable Care Act?
ELIZABETH EASTON:
It saved my life.
It's -- yes, it's great.
PAUL SOLMAN: We came to
this corner of Kentucky
last week, famous as the
birthplace of Colonel
Sanders' Kentucky Fried Chicken,
because it's seen one of the
biggest drops in the uninsured
rate due to the
Affordable Care Act.
Kathy Oller says she herself has
signed up thousands, including,
on this day, mall jewelry
store worker Aaron Lewis.
AARON LEWIS, Kentucky: To me
personally, it was worth the
peace of mind to have some sort
of safety net.
In case something did happen
to me or in case some illness
or accident happened, I would
be a little bit more
covered, rather than
susceptible to bankruptcy.
PAUL SOLMAN: But when we
visited, with just over a week
to go before the deadline for
2017 coverage, the enrollment
rush had stalled, in part due
to the Trump administration's
cancellation of ads
urging people to sign up.
But there's another
reason, says Oller.
KATHY OLLER, Obamacare
Enrollment Official:
Some people feel that
because Trump's in office,
why do we have to have
it, because they're hoping
they don't get fined.
PAUL SOLMAN: In other
words, they're counting
on repeal to kill the
mandate, the requirement
to buy health insurance, or else
pay a penalty to the government.
ANTHONY FLANNERY, Kentucky:
We get this letter, you got to
get insurance, which instantly
infuriated me.
PAUL SOLMAN: Don't tread on me.
ANTHONY FLANNERY: Yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: Health care worker
Anthony Flannery refused to
buy insurance each of the last
two years.
ANTHONY FLANNERY: I was looking
at like $280 with a $6,000
deductible that would then pay
60 percent of any medical
expenses I may incur.
And I was like, no,
I'm not doing it.
So I will pay the penalty.
So, last year come
tax time, I owed $652.
PAUL SOLMAN: For tax year
2016, the fine will be higher.
But so what, says Perry Partin?
PERRY PARTIN: It's cheaper
to pay the fine than it is
to pay for the insurance.
PAUL SOLMAN: So are you
going to pay the fine,
instead of the insurance?
PERRY PARTIN: I probably
will, you know, because,
I mean, my cup's about
run over with insurance.
PAUL SOLMAN: But can whatever
replaces Obamacare accommodate
Perry Partin, while also caring
for Beth Easton?
ELIZABETH EASTON: This time last
year, I was in the hospital,
almost died several times.
PAUL SOLMAN: With her many
preexisting conditions?
ROBERT FRANK, Economist, Cornell
University: If you don't have
a mandate, you cannot have
an insurance system.
PAUL SOLMAN: To an economist
like Bob Frank, cases like
Easton's make the logic behind
the mandate crystal clear.
ELIZABETH EASTON: The only
way a system of insurance can
work is if everybody's in the
pool together, healthy
and sick people alike.
And if you want healthy
people in the pool, you
have essentially got
to mandate that they
be a participant.
PAUL SOLMAN: It's simply how
insurance works, he says.
ROBERT FRANK: The insurance
company needs a large number
of people, only a few of whom
are going to make
claims against it.
PAUL SOLMAN: But if it
were mainly sick people
in the pool, the costs per
person would skyrocket.
Moreover, poorer people,
who also tend to have poorer
health, need financial help to
pay their premiums.
AARON LEWIS: There's no
way to insure people who
have lower income are
able to get it without
increasing taxes on somebody.
PAUL SOLMAN: In the case
of Obamacare, increasing
taxes on top earners,
who help subsidize most
of the 20-plus million people
who gained coverage under
the Affordable Care Act.
ROBERT FRANK: And so there you
have the three basic components
of the Affordable Care Act,
mandates -- you have
to buy insurance -- the
guarantee that if you have
preexisting conditions,
you can't be denied coverage,
and then subsidies if you
can't afford to buy insurance.
If you take any one
of those away, the
whole system collapses.
PAUL SOLMAN: And if the current
system is repealed, but not
replaced, at least 18 million
people stand to lose
their insurance within
a year, according to
the Congressional Budget
Office, which might feel
worse than never having
had insurance at all.
KATHY OLLER: I think it's
such a backwards step, because
they are now excited because
they have the opportunity
to sign up for health care.
And if they take it away,
it's just going backwards,
instead of forward.
PAUL SOLMAN: Behavioral
economists call this loss
aversion, illustrated
in this YouTube
cartoon.
MAN: It's more painful to
lose something than it's
joyful to gain something.
PAUL SOLMAN: To most people,
it turns out, losing $1,000,
say, hurts far more than the
pleasure of $1,000 windfall.
And Bob Frank applies this
attachment to what we have
to threats to Obamacare.
ROBERT FRANK: Millions have
coverage now for the first time.
And if they take people's
coverage away from them with
this new repeal measure, you're
going to see a political
firestorm unlike anything we
have seen in recent history.
PAUL SOLMAN: It was enough to
scare Elizabeth Easton straight.
ELIZABETH EASTON: I had an
epiphany, like, the world's
gone completely mad, and I have
got to get better.
Seriously.
I'm not joking.
So, thank you, Mr. Trump.
(LAUGHTER)
ELIZABETH EASTON: You
got me sober, so I can
try to save health care.
PAUL SOLMAN: No wonder
Republicans are having
such a tough time coming
up with a replacement
plan, and how hard it is for
working folks like Anthony
Flannery, who finally joined
the insurance pool this year.
ANTHONY FLANNERY: If we want to
look at this from a standpoint
of doing my part to fit
into this pool and this
social responsibility,
I can handle that.
PAUL SOLMAN: But to Bobbi Smith
and Perry Partin, it's the
very principle of a mandate
that rankles, no
matter the economics.
How can there be health
insurance if the healthier
people don't participate?
Because then it's just going
to be the sicker people who are
going to be insured, and then
the cost is going
to be too high, no?
BOBBI SMITH: You made a point.
(LAUGHTER)
BOBBI SMITH: I didn't
say I necessarily agreed.
You made a point I
will think about.
PERRY PARTIN: I would
say you're right.
But I'm just like her.
If you want insurance,
it would be your option.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the
"PBS NewsHour," economics
correspondent Paul
Solman, reporting from
Corbin, Kentucky.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The West
African nation of Liberia has
had more than its fair shares
of challenges, a 14-year civil
war and an Ebola epidemic
that left nearly 5,000 people
dead.
But on a recent trip, special
correspondent Fred de Sam
Lazaro found one American woman
trying to help the
country rebuild,
focusing on young girls.
It's part of Fred's
series Agents for Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Thirty-four
year old Katie Meyler is a
well-known figure in West Point,
one of the poorest
slums in Monrovia.
With a freckled face, strawberry
blonde hair, combat boots,
and a dress, she stands out.
But Meyler feels right at home
here, and there's no greater
proof of that than her decision
to remain here during the
Ebola epidemic that ravaged
the city two years ago.
The virus took
thousands of lives.
Most outsiders who
weren't medical
personnel were evacuated,
including journalists.
Meyler filled that void
with regular social media
posts and interviews.
KATIE MEYLER, Founder, More
Than Me Academy: I'd rather die
at 30 years old, or 32 years
old, living for what I really
believe from head to toe in
every single way possible than
to live to be 90 years
old and not really fulfill
what I was born to do.
Benu is actually number
1 in her classes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: For the
past 11 years, Meyler has
made young women like Benu her
cause.
She is the founder of
the More Than Me Academy,
a private school which
provides free education
for kindergarten through
sixth-grade girls,
and then scholarships
for them to go on to
high school.
Most of the girls come
from large families
and would normally be
selling food and water
in the streets, or
something worse.
Meyler says the extreme
poverty in Liberia
leads to particularly
insidious behaviors.
KATIE MEYLER: How bad
when you're trying just
every single day to get
a cup of rice to stay
alive?
You know, I've seen and heard
and know of mothers that have
ended up prostituting their
own children just to survive,
and it sounds horrific to
anybody on the outside.
Of course.
How can a mother do that?
But how could a mother
let her daughter die, too?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Meyler's
passion for social justice began
more than 20 years ago as a
teenager in suburban New
Jersey, where she was
raised by a single mother.
Often, the family was
dysfunctional, she says.
Often, they had
to go on welfare.
Meyler says she found
solace at her church.
KATIE MEYLER: It felt good
to help others, and it helped
me get out of my own things
that were going on in my life.
So, I got addicted to really
making other people happy.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She went
on to graduate from college,
the first in her family to do
so, and took a paid
internship with the charity
Samaritan's Purse, which
assigned her to Liberia.
KATIE MEYLER: I didn't
know where Liberia was on
a map, and I Googled it.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: So it was
meant to be for six months?
KATIE MEYLER: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
It's been 11 years.
(LAUGHTER)
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
What happened?
KATIE MEYLER: There's a saying
that nobody chooses Liberia,
that Liberia chooses you.
I think part of it is, you come
here and you see the amount
of need the place has, and
the people are very warm
and open, and you can make
a big difference here.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She
saw a need for education.
Ten years ago, more
than half of all primary
school-aged children
didn't attend, collateral
damage from this country's
14-year-long civil war.
So, Meyler began raising
money, at first mostly through
her church for scholarships.
But she quickly became
disenchanted with
the existing schools.
KATIE MEYLER: They're not really
learning anything at school,
because the teachers don't
come on time.
Even -- both in public and
private schools, it's very rare
that teachers show up and they
are accountable.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Meyler
decided she had to start her
own school, so she raised money
from both small and large donors
in the United States, purchased
a building, and hired teachers.
The school provides breakfast
and lunch, medical services,
and after-school programs.
There's a strong emphasis
on empowering girls to stand
up against sexual abuse.
The school can
accommodate 180 students.
Hundreds more wish
they could attend.
We met one of them on
our trip to West Point.
KATIE MEYLER: But she
stopped in third grade
from going to school
because her family doesn't
have any money.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: What can
you do for a child like this?
KATIE MEYLER: So, unfortunately,
our school only has 180
spots, and so, at this point,
we don't have any space.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
And her students are
still playing catchup.
Ebola shut down all schools
in Liberia for a full year,
a period when educating girls
took a back seat to saving
their lives, she says, even
as she feared for her own.
KATIE MEYLER: What defines
you the most is what you
do despite your fear.
And so I was extremely afraid.
I had -- I signed my power of
attorney away before I left,
just in case something happened.
There was a real,
legitimate concern that
I might not return home.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She had
to bribe her way into the West
Point neighborhood where most
of her students live.
It had been quarantined and,
she discovered, had virtually
no health services or equipment.
She raised money to buy
ambulances and medical
supplies and turned her
school into a disaster
response center.
KATIE MEYLER: Our plan was,
do everything you can to keep
everybody alive, and then
when you can't do anything else,
bring dignity in death, so we
did a lot of that, too, like
singing to people, praying
with people while they died.
Children that were dying
outside, some of them were just
laying outside of the overflow
center.
The ones inside were actually
worse off, because they were the
dead mixed with the living all
there.
And they could barely
move, barely could speak.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: How
do you recover from that?
KATIE MEYLER: I don't want to
get over this, because we have
to do something to make sure
it doesn't happen again.
I think that remembering and
feeling what it felt like and
to see that national emergency,
it motivates me and fuels
me to fight to ensure that
it doesn't happen again.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Meyler
believes one of the main
contributors to the Ebola crisis
was the lack of education,
so she went to the government
to propose that some private
groups be brought into
overhaul the system.
A pilot project began this
past fall using seven different
organizations to revamp 94
schools.
More Than Me was put in charge
of six of those schools.
We met up with Meyler at a
back-to-school celebration in
the rural village of Bogbeh.
KATIE MEYLER: Most of the
parents and the community
members here don't read or write
and didn't have basic education.
So, they're really excited that
out of 2,750 public schools
in the country that really
aren't functioning, barely
functioning, if functioning
at all, that their school was
selected among a few.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Meyler and
her staff have helped oversee
school repairs, the development
of new curricula and
installation of teacher
trainers at each
of the six schools.
The attention she earned during
the Ebola crisis, including
being named a "TIME" magazine
Person of the Year, has opened
the doors to philanthropists.
Meyler hopes to raise $25
million over the next five
years to expand to 500 schools.
But, ultimately, she hopes
the partnership project is so
successful that the private
partners can
relinquish their roles.
KATIE MEYLER: Our goal here
is to go out of business.
I mean, I can tell you, for
us, we're successful when
we're not needed anymore.
We're successful when Liberia's
government can run these
schools, and the teachers are
at capacity, and Liberia
doesn't need to have all
these -- the external support.
And that's what
we working toward.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: While she
hopes to go out of business
in a more prosperous future
Liberia, for her own future,
Meyler says she has no plans
to leave her adopted country.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Fred de Sam Lazaro
in Monrovia, Liberia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Fred's
reporting is a partnership
with the Under-Told
Stories Project at the
University of St.
Thomas in Minnesota.
Now to another in our Brief
But Spectacular series.
In honor of Black History Month,
we turn to poet Clint Smith,
a doctoral student at Harvard
University.
He studies racial
inequality in the U.S.
And his first full-length
collection of poems, "Counting
Descent," was published in 2016.
CLINT SMITH, Harvard University:
A letter to five of the
presidents who owned slaves
while they were in office.
George Washington, when you
won the revolution, how many of
your soldiers did you send from
a battlefield to
the cotton field?
How many had to trade in
their rifles for plows?
Can you blame the slaves who ran
away to fight for the British,
because at least the Redcoats
were honest about
their oppression?
Thomas Jefferson, when
you told Sally Hemings
that you would free her
children if she remained
your mistress, did you
think there was honor
in your ultimatum?
Did you think we wouldn't
be able to recognize the
assault in your signature?
Does raping your slave, when
you disguise it as bribery,
make it less of a crime?
When you wrote the Declaration
of Independence, did you ever
intend for black people to have
freedom over their
bodies, James Madison?
When you wrote to Congress
that black people should count
as three-fifths of a person,
how long did you have
to look at your slaves
to figure out the math?
Was it easy to chop them up?
Did you think they would
be happy being more
than just half-human?
James Monroe, when you proposed
sending slaves back to Africa,
did black bodies feel like
rented tools?
When you branded them, did
the scar on their chest
include an expiration date?
When you named the
country Liberia, were
you trying to be ironic?
Does this really
count as liberation?
Andrew Jackson, was the Trail
of Tears not enough for you?
Was killing Cherokee, Choctaw,
Creek, Seminoles not enough
to quench your imperialism?
How many brown bodies
do you have to bulldoze
before you can call it
progress, Mr. Washington,
Jefferson, Madison,
Monroe, Jackson?
When you put your hand on the
Bible and swore to protect this
country, let's be honest in
who you were talking about.
When the first Independence
Day fireworks set the sky
aflame, don't forget where we
were watching from.
So, when you remember
Jefferson's genius, don't
forget the slaves who
built the bookshelves
in his library.
When you remember
Jackson's victories in
war, don't forget what he
was fighting to preserve.
When you sing that this country
was founded on freedom, don't
forget the duet of shackles
dragging against the
ground my entire life.
I have been taught how perfect
this country was, but no one
ever told me about the pages
torn out of my textbooks, how
black and brown bodies have been
bludgeoned for three centuries
and find no place
in the curriculum.
Oppression doesn't disappear
just because you decided not
to teach us that chapter.
If you only hear one side of
the story, at some point, you
have to question who the writer
is.
I'm a third-year graduate
student at Harvard University.
And I study broadly the
history of racial inequality
in the United States.
I taught high school English
for several years in Prince
George's County, Maryland.
And part of what I always
think about is how important
it is to complicate history.
The presidents and the founding
fathers and all of the people
we sort of raise up as false
idols, we don't wrestle with
the fact that many of these
were brilliant men, but they
were also men with
deep prejudices against
people of color, against
indigenous people,
against women.
The Jefferson I learned
about was the intellectual
founding father of this
country, responsible
for the conception of the
Declaration of Independence
and the Constitution.
And we never talked about the
fact that he owned slaves.
Only after we understand
where we have come from can we
understand how we need to move
forward.
My name is Clint Smith.
And this is my Brief But
Spectacular take on complicating
the history of the United
States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can
find additional Brief But
Spectacular episodes on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
And now to a "NewsHour" Shares.
In 2006, after billionaire
businessman Warren
Buffett announced that
he was giving away
much of his fortune,
people started writing him
letters asking for help.
He turned them over to his
sister, who has been responding
to them ever since as part
of a foundation.
Tina Martin from PBS station
WGBH in Boston has the story.
TINA MARTIN: These letters are
from people from all across
the country who are desperate
for help.
NONI CAMPBELL, Letters
Foundation: Somebody would
say, I'm on disability
and I need dentures
and I don't have any money.
Could you help me with dentures?
TINA MARTIN: Some
are handwritten.
Others are typed.
But they all come to the Letters
Foundation, run by billionaire
Warren Buffet's older sister,
Doris.
She started reading letters
at the request of her brother,
who was being flooded with
pleas for help.
Noni Campbell is a
longtime friend of Doris,
lovingly called Dodo.
They met more than a decade ago.
NONI CAMPBELL: She had a blue
sofa in her condo up in Maine,
and she would be sitting
in one little corner of it,
and the entire rest of the sofa
was piled with letters from
people, boxes and boxes.
TINA MARTIN: All of those
boxes came with Doris Buffett
when she moved to Boston, but
she needed help reading them;
1,200 people volunteered.
Emily Holland was one of them.
EMILY HOLLAND, Letters
Foundation: I think we
don't want to believe
how easy it is to
fall into a situation that's
overwhelming or that we feel
like we can't get out of.
TINA MARTIN: Volunteers are
being trained over the next
several weeks, but not everyone
will read letters,
AMY KINGMAN, Letters Foundation:
We actually created a new
role, which are the group -- a
number of people who are
here training today, and
those are our researchers.
TINA MARTIN: The researchers
will verify people's
identities and stories.
They also make sure requests
fulfill the foundation's
mission of making
one-time grants to help
them get back on their feet.
Unfortunately,
businesses is brisk.
TEVIS SPEZIA, Letters
Foundation: Since we
have been in Boston,
we have given out about
260,000 in the
fiscal year of 2016.
In total, we have given out
about a little over 300,000 now.
We give any sorts of grants
upwards of $35,000 in a case
like that that's a handicap van,
and you have to spend a little
bit more to provide the vehicle,
and then smaller amounts
to cover some utilities and
help people get back on their
feet can be as small as $200,
$300.
TINA MARTIN: While the
foundation operates
with a strict budget,
there is no budget when
it comes to giving.
TEVIS SPEZIA: If anyone has
worked closely with Doris, she
always speaks about how she
wants her last check to bounce.
TINA MARTIN: The Buffett
family is also very hands-on.
Now 89, Doris isn't
always in the office, but
talks with staff daily.
It's part of her personal
touch, like how people are
required to make a request with
old-fashioned letters.
MIMI ROZEK, Letters Foundation:
She really loves the personal
connection of a handwritten
letter.
That's how the program really
started, too, with Warren,
was people writing and sending
in physical letters.
TINA MARTIN: And Mimi Rozek,
Doris' granddaughter, promises
they read every letter.
MIMI ROZEK: It's very humbling.
And, at times, it's a little
bit stressful, just because
sometimes we can't help with
all of them for various
reasons, but the vast
majority, we are able to help.
And that's really great.
TINA MARTIN: For the
"PBS NewsHour," I'm
Tina Martin in Boston.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's
an inspiration.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.